unlike many of my viewers I am old
enough to remember the year 1989 and
amoled enough to have witnessed the
disintegration and reintegration of
communist ideology in the years after
1989 after 1989 many different political
tendencies in schools of thought took
the bits and pieces of what had been
communism what had been previously
openly called Marxism and socialism and
tried to reformulate them under various
headings I think the only heading that's
really lasted has been anti capitalism
and I really do regard anti capitalism
as the stupidest the least worthy of
rebuttal the most worthless of the air
sets ideologies of our era and as a
political program that has nothing
positive to offer in Canada
it has nothing positive offer in Taiwan
I mean I've lived in and I've examined
and researched so many diverse countries
and settings and anti capitalism sadly
has emerged from the rubble of communism
as this sort of very peculiar worst of
all worlds mixed bag of you know
ideological bits and pieces many of you
if you watch this and you identify as
anti-capitalist will feel that the
critique I'm about to offer it doesn't
apply to you and that in itself is part
of the problem here if you have an
entirely nebulous and negatively defined
political movement then it is very easy
for people to shirk responsibility for
people to evade any form of debate
discussion or accountability by simply
saying oh well that doesn't apply to me
whereas communism or Marxism had a clear
definition had foundational texts you
could very clearly delineate who was and
wasn't a real communist or of course
there are various specific categories
with the in communism that people either
did or did not adhere to and so on
for the purpose of this video I'm gonna
address two categories of
anti-capitalist on the one hand there
are the anti capitalists who have
retained their adherents to the concept
of class war it would be fair to say
that the most important light motif of
Marxism that continued through all forms
of communism was the idea of class war
or class warfare as a famous phrase no
war but the class war the reality of
what class war is you can read it in a
purely theoretical sense you can read it
in mark so you can read it in Lenin you
can read it in Stalin you can read about
the dog I think it's crucially important
for people to take the time to read the
horrifying accounts of door-to-door
house-to-house violence of robbery of
rape of torture of murder of what class
warfare really meant in practice in any
one example whether that's in Russia in
1917 or it's in Cambodia in the 1970s
class war simply put is not class
reeducation it's not class Socratic
debate it's not class democracy it's not
class mutual representation in house of
parliament class war is a violent
struggle of one group of people to snuff
out silenced murder another and history
has shown that again and again in the
history of communism there are anti
capitalists and I have seen them and met
them and heard them speak and
face-to-face and others talking about
YouTube or rum you know in published
form there are anti-capitalist who still
support class war and those anti
capitalists have basically held on to
the most violent most destructive most
immoral aspects of communism while oddly
giving up the structured system building
elements that you know both provide a
rationale for that violence provide a
sort of philosophical series of excuses
for it and also provide other elements
that might be of some use to somebody
somewhere
elements related to I don't know
organizing labor dissent in this kind of
thing so that really is a sort of
remarkable worst of all worlds form of
anti capitalism and many of you watching
this video just given who my viewers are
will say that they are anti-capitalist
but they don't believe in anything like
that they don't believe in class war
they don't believe that as Marx sat down
and so many comments believed over after
that the laws of history require a
violent struggle between social classes
to achieve progress of any kind okay
that's the second category of anti
capitalists or the anti capitalists who
identify with this concept but who do
not endorse violence and who have
definitely distanced themselves in a
more meaningful sense to a greater
extent from the legacy of communism when
I speak to people in the second category
face to face to make anti capitalism
less nebulous I often talk to them about
what the definition of capitalism really
is because they very often are
interested knowing why I am NOT an anti
capitalist anti-capitalism unlike
communism does not have a clear and
coherent contrast to offer to capitalism
obviously communists were not just anti
capitalist they were Pro communist and
they could point to one of several real
systems social organization in which
banking did not operate in which private
property did not exist in which various
forms of heavy-handed state control of
enterprise replace the role of private
sector investors and so on so they could
say okay this is capitalism and this is
anti capitalism it's needless to say
that those experiments were by and large
disasters almost none of those people
would choose to live in the Soviet Union
under Stalin or even in East Germany etc
etc nevertheless let's not digress they
did have a contrast to posed and the
vast majority of anti capitalists in the
current era and in the second category
of basically being nonviolent
and they're often unable to articulate
what it is in the definition of
capitalism they object to and of course
they do not want to rely on for example
a contrast between capitalism and
feudalism the reality is the capitalism
in Europe is the system that emerged
from the disintegration of the system we
had in the Dark Ages a you know system
of feudal control of land and property
and wealth and production you know
during the era of feudalism we actually
did have factories we did have some
remarkably advanced technology there are
very inspiring and well illustrated
books about you know how the world
worked in again its can it's impressive
in some ways and the Roman Empire it's
impressive in ancient China and yes
actually in the in the Middle Ages in
Europe you can look at remarkable
examples of how you know without
electricity people did organize large
scale industries large-scale factories
glass factories for example but you know
creation of textiles under many many
headings in many ways human organization
was complex but in Europe in Western
Europe specifically there was a system
that banned the buying and selling of
land there was a system that tied the
ownership of land to people's names
tables hereditary rights and for the
most part not for everyone inside you
before huge numbers of people tied their
job where they were allowed to live what
kind of work they were allowed to do to
the land to serfdom of various kinds
capitalism simply put is what emerged
from the disintegration of that system
and as you may be aware it disintegrated
in places like Holland the Netherlands
more rapidly than it disintegrated in
places like Russia in Russia the
abolition of serfdom was embarrassingly
late and it was for that reason that in
the Netherlands you had the first
emergence of the corporation as a real
entity a corporation that had voting
rights for investors and this again was
part of the progress towards modern
democracy not democracy as we knew in
ancient Athens shareholder democracy as
it's called voting within corporations
actually came about before modern
democracy in a meaningful
it is not worth my dressing into the
history of that many people in England
especially really misunderstand just how
late and how recent the features of
modern democracy were in their
parliamentary system okay I won't I'm
tempted to say more about that but
anyway the function of the Parliament
itself changed tremendously at a later
date than most people want to admit even
though the name of the Parliament
existed there was a time when it did not
at all serve the public function that we
we now associate with it um in any case
this peculiar progress towards a concept
of semi democratic government capitalist
democracy is certainly badly flawed in
many ways and of accountability of
companies to their shareholders and if
the buying and selling of land as
something that anyone can own not tied
to your name to your birthright not tied
to favours granted to you by a king
because your ancestors fought in a war
and not for any other reason you know
capitalism in some ways it's easy to
define if you work against the checklist
can you buy and sell land is there a
private and independent operation of
banks or businesses started up by
private individuals who get a bank loan
etc etc you can put together this
checklist and it's very useful to
contrast that to how communism operated
or to how feudalism operated and in some
countries around the world still today
there are aspects of feudalism that
still exist there are some countries
where indigenous peoples still own land
through a king or a chiefdom and then
grant the right to farm that land in a
in a feudal manors feudalism here and
there around the world is still a
significant way of organizing land
organizing people and organising an
economy in some places sadly of course
slavery still exists too um but when I
invite people to express to me precisely
what it is that they dislike about
capitalism I very often find that the
people who define themselves as
anti-capitalist
are not in fact anti-capitalist at all
they're simply people who lack an
education in economics 101
and I do realize that some of you
watching this video will be deeply
offended by that um however if it makes
you feel any better believe me the vast
majority of people I met who were
diehard communists utterly lacked an
education and economics 101 for them if
anything they found you know a certain
mystique to any kind of economic claim
and the magical thinking surrounding
economics and communism was often
something that drew them in something
made them feel powerful made them feel
that they understood truly how the
world's economy worked well others did
not now one of the peculiar ironies
within anti capitalism today is that the
driving sentiment is often a sense of
horror at the exploitation of workers in
factories for example the exploitation
of child labour and they're unaware that
Karl Marx was Pro child labor read
volume one ad s capital if you don't
believe me and that Karl Marx was
incredibly optimistic about factory
labor itself and this is a contrast to
the bizarre guilt over a factory labor
of any kind or exploitation of labor of
any kind that tends to be the sort of
bottom most sentiment animating people
who consider themselves anti capitalists
they feel guilt about the fact that the
products they buy are made in factories
in conditions that they imagined are
terrible and in some cases not all this
is true I mean in some cases that
clothes you wear may be made by
prisoners this wasn't I've met the
tailor face to face I know exactly who
made this I've seen the room he works in
I've met his wife I know what conditions
he lives in so believe me not all
clothing is paid by slave labor not
everyone's working in a sweatshop um
anyway nice guy too so you know it's
possible to know exactly where your
clothes come from or where your shoes
come from and it's not all bad news
my point here is not just to draw
attention to the contrasting the
tremendous optimism Colt Marx had all of
society would be regenerated by factory
labor he optimistically says in des
Capital Marx believed that child labour
would empower children to become
independent from their parents and this
would be part of the breakdown of the
oppressive and feudal nature of the
nuclear family that this new era of
factory labor was going to
right everyone because kids would have
their own income in early age so the
parents couldn't push them around so
much anymore
he was recklessly optimistic about
factory labor in contrast to the
conditions of peasants he thought this
was the end of an era of you know
peasants toiling in ignorance and being
dependent on the state and this was
instead an era of independent factory
workers in the withering away of the
states there's all kinds of bizarre
idealism Karl Marx said that's
incompatible with the baseline
assumptions of the sort of white guilt
based ad capitalism that I see being
somewhat popular today it's only a
moderately popular ideology many many
months ago maybe a couple of years ago
on this channel I did talk about this
under some headings if you are sincerely
concerned about factory conditions do
research visit factories learn real
facts move beyond ambiguous and nebulous
moral claims to understand how the
factories really work because I tell you
something in Cambodia where I did
actually do research on factory
conditions but in Cambodia as an example
you can visit one factory where
conditions are wonderful and where
people are living really good lives and
earning good money etc etc and you can
visit another factory where the
conditions are much worse and the
workers are unhappy er and the pay is
too low and so on and the difference
between those two factories is not the
difference between capitalism and anti
capitalism it's not the difference
between libertarianism and socialism
it's not the difference between
conservative and liberal the difference
between a good workplace and a bad
workplace does not lend itself to any of
the polarizing ideologies of our era but
so many polarizing ideologies have tried
to fasten onto these things have tried
to take a hold of the concept of
exploitation itself and to cynically
make it into a justification for their
personal strokes or their party struggle
to take over power to take over
government to take over the state and
the reality is that exploits
and melee rating or ending exploitation
of improving exploitative practices
whether it's in farming or in factories
or in the coffee shop down the street is
not linked to any one ideology um you
can go to a wonderful factory that's run
by a conservative Catholic you can go to
a wonderful factor that's run by a left
wing person you can go to a wonderful
factory that's run by some right-wing
libertarian person but who really cares
about his workers having good conditions
and you can learn all their bizarre
management philosophies or what kind of
education they had or how they came to
run their particular factory in the way
that they did and you can look at the
material conditions and the political
conditions and why it is that sometimes
you have two factories that are across
the street from each other and the
conditions are so very different so in a
sense the alternative to from my
perspective the alternative to anti
capitalism as an ideology is anti
ideology the alternative is to really
care to have sincere humanitarian
engagement whether it's with the reality
of the factories that make your clothes
or the factors that make toys the
factories that make iPhones whatever it
is you can do the work these things are
knowable and you can't know everything
but at some stage in that process of
forming of having an informed opinion
about how the stuff we buy is made
you're going to realize that there is no
simple ideological fissure between right
and wrong good and evil and it's simply
not the case that socialists or
communists or left-wingers or anti
capitalists have a magic bullet solution
that would improve factory conditions
for everyone on the contrary all of us
are left with a tremendously complex
world a tremendously nuanced world of
government regulation of labor activism
of various free market forces and of you
know the other reality being that at any
given time there are millions and
millions of people who do live dignified
lives who do earn a good honest living
whether it's working in factories or
making this jacket a tailor shop down
the road it isn't the case that there's
a simple class of the oppressed to be
contrast to a class
of the oppressors instead the world is
full of gray areas of conflicting and
complex information between good working
conditions bad working conditions
mediocre working conditions and a
direction --less struggle of human
beings trying to live lives of dignity
and of different political forces trying
to improve the lot of different classes
of workers at any given time that in no
sense conforms to Karl Marx's simplified
view of class war it neither justifies
class war nor is justified by